Implementation Plan: Augment the catalog database with suitable Rekognition tags (#4417)
WordPress/openverse: documentation/projects/proposals/rekognition_data/20240530-implementation_plan_augment_catalog_with_rekognition_tags.md

[^5]:
    [Bass, D. (2019, April 3). Amazon Schooled on AI Facial Technology By Turing Award Winner. _Bloomberg_.](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-04-03/amazon-schooled-on-ai-facial-technology-by-turing-award-winner)

[^6]:
    [Buolamwini, J. (2019, January 25). Response: Racial and Gender bias in Amazon Rekognition — Commercial AI System for Analyzing Faces. _Medium_.](https://medium.com/@Joy.Buolamwini/response-racial-and-gender-bias-in-amazon-rekognition-commercial-ai-system-for-analyzing-faces-a289222eeced)

Machine-generated tags that are the product of AI image labeling models have
been shown repeatedly and consistently to perpetuate certain cultural,
structural, and institutional biases[^1][^2][^3]. This includes analysis done on
[AWS Rekognition](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/rekognition/),
specifically[^4][^5][^6].

Certain demographic axes seem the most likely to result in an incorrect or
insensitive label (e.g. gender assumption of an individual in a photo). For the
reasons described in the above cited works, we should **exclude** labels that
have a demographic context in the following categories:

- Age
- Gender
- Sexual orientation
- Nationality

> - Race

Reviewer: I am completely on board with:

1. Treat the catalog as a data warehouse, store all/as much initial data as possible.
2. Do not surface _any_ demographic/identity/affiliation information about human subjects. 

I totally understand the intention behind "less likely to be applied in an insensitive manner" but I don't think it is a strong enough heuristic for use here.

> - Race

Author: Thanks for both your input on this! As described in my comment above, I had just gotten my perspective locked into a certain view of the catalog and what was possible on the API. I appreciate your thoughts here, and I think I'd like to make the following changes to the approach:
1. Store all the data we can in the catalog
2. Filter the tags out as part of the indexing into Elasticsearch, leaving the `SELECT` from the catalog to the API as simple as possible
3. Only surface tags that are returned in the Elasticsearch hit, not all the tags that are available in the API database (since it will have them all)
4. Don't surface any demographic labels

This will give us flexibility for changing the data down the line (we only need to update the filters and reindex Elasticsearch, we don't need to rebuild the API DB from scratch), while preventing the need for adding steps to filter out each result in the API code and potentially affecting performance there.

> - Race

Reviewer 2: FWIW I think we should filter the tags when inserting in to the API database as well, otherwise every search response has an N*N+1 loop to filter the tags during serialization. We can amortise that by doing it when inserting into the API database, from which I believe the indexers select the Elasticsearch data to begin with, right? If we filter it when inserting into the API, then we don't need to _also_ filter it for Elasticsearch, and then don't need to do anything when returning a search.

> - Race

Author: The filtering on insert into the API database is not something that we're currently set up to do currently, though. The place we do it during the data refresh is in the cleaning step, which we're currently removing as part of the data normalization process.

My suggestion was to to filter when indexing into Elasticsearch, then simply replace the `tags` attribute of each result returned from the API with the `tags` entry in the matching Elasticsearch document. Do you think that approach would be feasible? Otherwise we'd need to make this insert query much more complicated: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/blob/b4ab20cdb220f442949d9c06a99ced5e80c1e1e1/ingestion_server/ingestion_server/queries.py#L168

> - Race

Reviewer: We could also consider switching to serving single results from Elasticsearch rather than the API DB to address this. I haven't considered the feasibility of it yet but we'd essentially just need to compare what data we don't index in es and if there would be downsides to adding it (slowing queries, filling the es disk, etc.)

> - Race

Reviewer 3: Adding my explicit +1 to what's been discussed, particularly removing demographic labels for human subjects. I had a note about religious affiliation as well.

> - Race

Reviewer 2: (I've referred to the catalogue DB as "Cat. DB" and Elasticsearch as ES in this).

> The filtering on insert into the API database is not something that we're currently set up to do currently, though. The place we do it during the data refresh is in the cleaning step, which we're currently removing as part of the data normalization process.

Yes, I recognise that. We (Staci, you and I) have just had a discussion about the different parts of the ETL pipeline, from provider to Elasticsearch, and I'm not entirely sure what the implications are for this now, but will share some further thoughts. Basically my suggestion overall is that perhaps attempting to entirely remove the T part of the ETL pipeline of Cat. DB -> API DB is unwise, because clearly we still need to sometimes do _some_ transformations after the catalog database. However, that is only true if the catalogue database really is the home for _everything_ at rest, including things we might not use right away, like tags we want to keep but don't want to use now.

One thing we discussed just now was potentially treating the Rekognition S3 -> Cat. DB ETL as not a one-time process, but something we could re-run in the future if we decided to change how we used the Rekogntion data. I'd like to formally suggest that now, because to my mind it would answer and simplify two rather urgent questions: first, on the purpose of the Cat. DB, API DB, and Elasticsearch as data destinations; second, on the purpose of the ETL between each of those. Pushing the filtering to before the labels reach the Cat. DB while definitively preserving the Rekognition data in S3, in part avoids these questions by putting the matter earlier in the data lifecycle, but also (most significantly) avoids introducing a new muddling of the purpose and relationship between the API DB and ES in particular.

On the matter of where to filter these specific values. Your suggestion to swap the ES tags into the API DB result when returning is clever, and gets rid of the `*N` issue of needing to filter individual tags during the API response. However, it sets a precedent that I'm uncomfortable with and which explicitly reverses decisions we've made in the past regarding the relationship between the API DB and ES. To put an even finer point on it, we used to have a muddied relationship between the two, where sometimes one or the other was used as the presentable data. Now, however, we have resolved that, and always use the API for presentation.  [See this PR as the notable inflection point of this relationship, which explicitly treats the API database as the presentable data, not ES](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/pull/3408). It would, as Zack pointed out, also require a single result response to query both ES and the API database, whereas now it only queries the API database. In my opinion, we need to have a single place that represents the presentable data, and Elasticsearch isn't that, not since the PR I've mentioned, and we've in fact explicitly decided against that. In the current formulation of responsibility, Elasticsearch is for searching, and the API database is for presenting, and in fact includes additional data (to name some examples, waveform, license version, height and width of images used for oembed, audio set and genre for audio), which isn't in ES. Treating part of ES as the presentable data and part of the API database as the presentable data introduces mixed concerns between the two, which significantly complicates reasoning about how the API functions, and the purpose of each data location. This, to me, is critical to solve (and to prevent further complications to), and other than not including the data in the catalogue database (while making it possible to easily do so in the future, by re-running the Rekognition S3 -> Cat. DB ETL DAG), the only way to prevent that is to filter at the Cat. DB -> API DB stage, which you've deemed too complex (though I acknowledge Staci has a potentially differing opinion here), and which would be a new thing anyway. My suggestion avoids adding new things to existing pieces of our data puzzle until we have clearer overall expectations of the responsibilities of each part of our overall data lifecycle. This might also have the additional happy side effect of being easily reusable or adaptable to incorporating any data generated as part of #1968 (which is outside the scope of both these projects, but which we should anticipate).

Therefore, I suggest treating Rekognition S3 -> Cat. DB ETL as a repeatable process, and that the Rekognition data would stay at rest in S3 forever, and represent _all_ the Rekognition data (at least from this source of that data).

My suggestion is also rooted in an understanding that perhaps the Cat. DB could one day be the place we keep _everything_ regardless of its downstream purpose. But for now, because these questions are introducing new complications into an IP that was otherwise meant to be relatively simple, and because there's a way of "punting" the question down the road, I suggest doing so. Thereby, we can avoid setting somewhat new precedents or reversing important past decisions now which aren't necessarily the scope of this IP. **To me, this is the most expedient choice, because it does not add new complexity to the project** (it mostly means we won't delete the DAG, and that when we write the DAG it should consider that it must be idempotent and can be re-run, which is already a principle of DAG writing, I think).

> We could also consider switching to serving single results from Elasticsearch rather than the API DB to address this. I haven't considered the feasibility of it yet but we'd essentially just need to compare what data we don't index in es and if there would be downsides to adding it (slowing queries, filling the es disk, etc.)

We cannot do that for the reasons I've shared above. ES does not contain all data needed for presentation, and to make it so would require significant new work, far outside the scope of this project or any other project we have on our roadmap, as well as explicitly inverse to previous decisions (see the PR I linked above).

There are other categories which might be useful for search relevancy and are
less likely to be applied in an insensitive manner. These labels **should not**
be excluded. Some examples include:

- Occupation

> - Marital status

Author: This is a great point to bring up and I'd say yes, those gendered terms should also excluded.

. AWS's own advice on what value to use is that
[it depends entirely on the use case of the application](https://aws.amazon.com/rekognition/faqs/#Label_Detection).

I took a small sample of the labels we have available (~100MB out of the 196GB
dataset, about 45k images with labels) and performed some exploratory analysis
on the data. I found the following pieces of information:

- **Total images**: 45,059
- **Total labels**: 555,718
- **Average confidence across all labels**: 79.927835
- **Median confidence across all labels**: 81.379463
- **Average confidence per image**: 81.073921
- **Median confidence per image**: 82.564148
- **Number of labels with confidence higher than 90**: 210,341
- **Percentage of labels with confidence higher than 90**: 37.85031%
- **Average number of labels per image higher than 90**: 4.6629

_For a full explanation on this exploration, see:
[Analysis explanation](#analysis-explanation)_

Based on the number of labels we would still be receiving with a confidence
higher than 90, and that 0.9 is already our existing minimum standard, **we
should retain 0.9 or 90% as our minimum label accuracy value** for inclusion in

> the catalog.

Author: To be completely frank, I simply had not considered the idea that we could add more filtering on the API end! My mind was stuck in a modality of "the copy to the API needs to be API-results-ready", and I think having that data sit in the API DB and just filter it out in responses works great! I was quite hesitant about this section of the proposal because I don't like the idea of throwing data out either. This also makes me feel a lot better about how to handle the Clarifai data too.

> the catalog.

Reviewer 3: This is an interesting philosophical question about the catalog :) I'm inclined to agree with the characterization of the catalog as raw data that can be _filtered_ in the API, as long as we make a distinction between filtering and transforming data.

Totally separate to the cleanup steps, we already do this in the data refresh when we copy data into the API tables -- we [exclude rows](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/blob/2da7be13b1c5dbca3d551b992fbbb90ec9be4cb9/ingestion_server/ingestion_server/queries.py#L178) that have an associated `DeletedMedia` record.

This necessarily means that we will not be including a projected 62% of the
labels which are available in the Rekognition dataset. Accuracy, as it directly
relates to search relevancy, is more desirable here than completeness. We will
retain the original Rekognition source data after ingesting the high-accuracy
tags, and so if we decide to allow a lower accuracy threshold, we can always

> re-add the lower confidence values at a later time.

Reviewer 3: +1! Would it be possible to get a sense of what percentage of labels will be included, once you remove labels with _any_ demographic assumptions from human subjects? Curious if that significantly lowers this percentage even further -- although I agree with your reasoning here in any case!

Author: Given a cursory glance over the list, I think the labels associated with the most results would be for things like "man" and "woman". You can get some idea of that from [the analysis Zack did](https://gist.github.com/zackkrida/ecba17d8fc89d8e4d8aa78e5e19199c0). In terms of percentage of _total labels_, it's probably quite small! Maybe dozens out of the thousands available.

Reviewer: Female, Girl, Woman, Teen, Man, Kid, Child, Boy, Baby, Priest, Senior Citizen, Tribe, Lady, and Monk are all of the potential demographic terms I see in our list of data.

3. [Generate and insert the new Rekognition tags](#insert-new-rekognition-tags)

## Step details

<!--
Describe all of the implementation steps listed in the "step-by-step plan" in detail.

For each step description, ensure the heading includes an obvious reference to the step as described in the
"step-by-step plan" section above.
-->

```{note}
Some of the steps listed below have some cross-over with functionality defined
in/required by the
[data normalization project](/projects/proposals/data_normalization/20240227-implementation_plan_catalog_data_cleaning.md)
(#430). Where possible, existing issues will be referenced and possible duplicated
effort will be identified.
```

### Determine excluded labels

This will involve a manual process of looking through each of the [available
labels for Rekognition][aws_rekognition_labels] and seeing if they match any of
the criteria to be filtered. The excluded labels should then be saved in an
accessible location, either on S3 or within the
[sensitive terms repository](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-sensitive-terms)
as a new file. Consent & approval should be sought from two other maintainers on

> the accuracy of the exclusion list prior to publishing.

Reviewer 2: Some observations that might inform how much detail we put into this part of the plan, and how we anticipate this work of determining which labels to use will go:

- There are 3082 labels in the "all labels" file of the linked zip. Will someone really look through each line of this file and determine which to include or exclude? How will this work be reviewed?
- I wasn't able to find any of the following terms in that list: muslim, christian, jesus, driver, steward, host, pilot, salesman (or saleswoman), homosexual, gay, transgender (or related terms).
- None of the listed professions (terms in the profession category) are gendered, but almost all of them are focused on urban, non-rural professions (except some are historical like knight, samurai, ninja, and arguably "pirate" depending on the context). That's just an interesting _different_ bias than I originally anticipated. The only one related to working outside is "gardner". The rest are performance related (magician, performer, ballerina, pianist) or things like surgeon, executive, teacher, veterenarian, soldier. Sniper, is weirdly included, which would be an interesting one to do analysis on and cross-compare our existing meta data to see where and when that label gets applied by Rekognition.
- Similarly, it includes "Monk", but not "Nun". Another interesting bias, and I wonder why they excluded nun. My guess is that it's difficult for computers to reliably distinguish between different types of head coverings. But do they only include Trappist-type monks? Or also Buddhist monks? Are all the monks medieval European monks? Interesting one!
- The rekognition label set is actually a lot _smaller_ than I thought, and way less controversial than I thought. I think there is less chance of the rekognition labels causing issues related to the two groups of label categories above, and in fact there are only two labels that I think are easy to argue for exclusion: man, boy, female, male, lady, woman, girl. On the other hand, funny enough, martial status is probably the second easiest to argue for exclusion, due to the almost inherently gendered content of these terms. Rekognition includes bride, bridegroom, bridesmaid. It does not include wife, husband, or partner.

I do not think we should rely on Rekognition's labels to inform our analysis of Clarifai's labels. We probably need to pull all the Clarifai labels into a list and evaluate them separately. I cannot find any specific list of labels on Clarifai's documentation (I spent only a little less than 10 minutes clicking around so I might have missed it), and my impression is that Clarifai has lots of different models, not just one (like Rekognition) and that even the source of "Clarifai" is maybe not that useful. It's be nice if we had the actual model they came from.

Can we pull the list of all Clarifai labels in the catalogue for evaluation? Is there a specific provider that has the Clarifai labels or is it spread across multiple providers? If it's only from one provider, then I wonder if we can reach out and ask them if they created those labels and what model they used if so. If it's from more than one, then probably that data is historical and from some project done during CC days? In which case, we should reach out to folks involved back then to see if they remember how those labels were acquired/generated to give us more information.

> the accuracy of the exclusion list prior to publishing.

Author: > There are 3082 labels in the "all labels" file of the linked zip. Will someone really look through each line of this file and determine which to include or exclude? How will this work be reviewed?

Yes, that was my intention and I can make this explicit in the IP if you'd like. Do you think it would be better to have two people go through this process and share lists at the end?

> We probably need to pull all the Clarifai labels into a list and evaluate them separately. I cannot find any specific list of labels on Clarifai's documentation (I spent only a little less than 10 minutes clicking around so I might have missed it), and my impression is that Clarifai has lots of different models, not just one (like Rekognition) and that even the source of "Clarifai" is maybe not that useful. It's be nice if we had the actual model they came from.

This was my experience as well; I looked for a list but was unable to find one. I like the idea of doing analysis on the labels we already have, potentially creating a list in a similar manner to the Rekognition labels provided and performing the same label selection there.

Just noting for myself: because of the separation between Rekognition and Clarifai, I don't think any of the Clarifai steps (since the data is already present!) need to prevent us from moving forward on the Rekognition data incorporation end (barring the other discussions happening in this IP).

> the accuracy of the exclusion list prior to publishing.

Reviewer 2: > Yes, that was my intention and I can make this explicit in the IP if you'd like. Do you think it would be better to have two people go through this process and share lists at the end?

That sounds good :+1: 

> Just noting for myself: because of the separation between Rekognition and Clarifai, I don't think any of the Clarifai steps (since the data is already present!) need to prevent us from moving forward on the Rekognition data incorporation end (barring the other discussions happening in this IP).

Agreed. We could exclude Clarifai tags from the searched tags when we do this work to exclude the tags from search (but keeping them in the catalog). And then add two more issues to this project, that essentially are just the same tasks for checking the Rekognition labels but doing so for Clarifai. So...

1. Exclude Clarifai tags from search by filtering them out during data refresh
2. Pull the Clarifai tags and decide which ones to use
3. Filter in the Clarifai tags we want to use during data refresh (which is the same thing we're already doing for Rekognition, so this should just be a new case in existing code, rather than an entirely new feature)

It does add new work, but I think we should track it and create the issues as a result of this IP, but if you want to exclude it from the project's "shipped" status to prevent adding that work to the scope of this project, that sounds fine to me. But we should track it and we might as well base that process on what we're doing for Rekognition, so that we're being consistent and following the same approach.

> the accuracy of the exclusion list prior to publishing.

Reviewer 3: +1 for having two people go through the process and share lists. I was going to recommend that reviewers of the excluded label list go through the entire source list when reviewing, since you would have to in order to make sure that all labels that needed to be excluded were properly identified. But doing the filtering independently and comparing afterward is an even better idea IMO!

> Just noting for myself: because of the separation between Rekognition and Clarifai, I don't think any of the Clarifai steps (since the data is already present!) need to prevent us from moving forward on the Rekognition data incorporation end (barring the other discussions happening in this IP).

Also agreed. I like the idea of doing analysis on the labels we already have. Shame we can't find a documented list :/

> the accuracy of the exclusion list prior to publishing.

Reviewer 2: Just want to note that https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/pull/4417#discussion_r1626779131 would have some implications for how to handle the Clarifai data. If we treat the Rekognition S3 -> Cat. DB ETL as a repeatable process and do the filtering there, then we won't have a mechanism for filtering Clarifai data. We'd need to similarly pull the Clarifai data out of the media tables (into S3? Into another table?) and then have an ETL process for loading in the Clarifai tags we want for each record based on filtering logic. Or else, we need to design the filtering of Rekognition tags such that it's directly usable for Clarifai tags, which means filtering it at the Cat. DB -> API DB/ES stage, which has it's own complications we're discussing in that other thread.

I don't want to segment the conversation from that thread, it's probably better to have it all in one place, and I've noted these issues there too, but I want to add that context to this one because it slightly complicates the 3 new tasks I suggested in my previous comment here if we filter Rekognition tags before inserting them into the Cat. DB because that's not a directly reusable/extendable process for the Clarifai tags as they are now.

### Filter Clarifai tags

```{attention}
A snapshot of the catalog database should be created prior to running this step
in production.
```

While this project seeks to add new magine-generated labels to the database, we
already have
[around 10 million records](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/pull/3948#discussion_r1552301581)
which include labels from the
[Clarifai image labeling service](https://www.clarifai.com/products/scribe-data-labeling-platform).
It is unclear how these labels were applied, or what the exhaustive label set
is. Given how comprehensive Rekognition's label list is, I feel confident that
the exclusions we identify from that list will be sufficient for filtering out
unwanted demographic labels that Clarifai has used as well.

Once the excluded labels are determined, we will need to filter those values
from the existing Clarifai tags. The existing tags also include Clarifai labels
that are below our [accuracy threshold](#accuracy-selection). These will be
removed by the data normalization project (#430) and do not need to be

> considered at this time.

Author: I realized this as part of writing this proposal - we're going to be using the "cleaned tags TSV" saved from the data refresh process to update the tags in the catalog. Right now we're excluding tags below 0.9 confidence: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/blob/3747f9aa40ed03899becb98ecae2abf926c8875f/ingestion_server/ingestion_server/cleanup.py#L133

This means that the tags below that confidence will be removed from the cleaned tags for a record, so when we update the catalog using that TSV, they'll also be removed.

> considered at this time.

Reviewer 2: Which issue is that? I'd like to block it based on this discussion about how to use the catalog database.

> considered at this time.

Author: #3912

I certainly did not realize we'd be deleting data as part of this when we initially embarked on that project, and I agree that preserving it is the right move for this case.

> considered at this time.

Reviewer 4: It was implicit in #3415 but we can exclude tags from there since we're shifting to use the `batched_update` DAG for that. Blocked while the discussion takes place ➕ 1️⃣

The easiest way to accomplish this with existing tooling would be to leverage
the [`batched_update` DAG][batched_update]. This update would select records
that include Clarifai tags, then (in SQL) remove any tags from the `jsonb` blob
that match the list of labels to exclude[^batch_tag_example]. Special care may
need to be taken for matching the casing of the label between Clarifai and the
excluded label list.

### Insert new Rekognition tags

The below steps describe a thorough, testable, and reproducible way to generate
and incorporate the new Rekognition tags. It would be possible to short-cut many
of these steps by running them as one-off commands or scripts locally (see
[Alternatives](#alternatives)). Since we may need to incorporate machine-labels
in bulk in a similar manner in the future, having a clear and repeatable process
for doing so will make those operations easier down the line. It also allows us
to test the insertion process locally, which feels crucial for such a

> significant addition of data.

Reviewer 3: Very much agreed! This is a worthwhile investment.

  "response": {
    "Labels": [
      {
        "Name": "Human",
        "Confidence": 99.82632446289062,
        "Instances": [],
        "Parents": []
      },
      {
        "Name": "Person",
        "Confidence": 99.82632446289062,
        "Instances": [
          {
            "BoundingBox": {
              "Width": 0.219997838139534,
              "Height": 0.46728312969207764,
              "Left": 0.6179072856903076,
              "Top": 0.39997851848602295
            },
            "Confidence": 99.82632446289062
          },
          ...
        ],
        "Parents": []
      },
      {
        "Name": "Crowd",
        "Confidence": 93.41161346435547,
        "Instances": [],
        "Parents": [
          {
            "Name": "Person"
          }
        ]
      },
      {
        "Name": "People",
        "Confidence": 86.95382690429688,
        "Instances": [],
        "Parents": [
          {
            "Name": "Person"
          }
        ]
      },
      {
        "Name": "Game",
        "Confidence": 68.61305236816406,
        "Instances": [],
        "Parents": [
          {
            "Name": "Person"
          }
        ]

>       },

Author: I'm not sure! This is just the data Rekognition provides 🤷🏼‍♀️ we aren't using any of the `Parents` tags

        "content-length": "3526",
        "connection": "keep-alive"
      },
      "RetryAttempts": 0
    }
  }
}
```

This file is about 200GB in total. For more information about the data, see
[Analysis Explanation](#analysis-explanation).

#### DAG

```{attention}
A snapshot of the catalog database should be created prior to running this step
in production.
```

We will create a DAG (`add_rekognition_labels`) which will perform the following
steps:

1. Create a temporary table in the catalog for storing the tag data. This table
   will be two columns: `identifier` and `tags` (with data types matching the
   existing catalog columns).
2. Iterate over the large Rekognition dataset in a chunked manner using
   [`smart_open`][smart_open]. `smart_open` provides
   [options for tuning buffer size](https://github.com/piskvorky/smart_open?tab=readme-ov-file#transport-specific-options)
   so larger chunks can be read into memory.
   1. For each line, read in the JSON object and pull out the top-level labels &
      confidence values. **Note**: some records may not have any labels.
   2. Filter out any labels that are below the

>       [accuracy threshold](#accuracy-selection) and that don't match the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      [accuracy threshold](#accuracy-selection) or that match the
```

      [excluded labels](#determine-excluded-labels).
   3. Construct a `tags` JSON object similar to the existing tags data for that
      image, including accuracy and provider. Ensure that the labels are lower
      case and that the confidence value is between 0.0 and 1.0 (e.g.
      `[{"name": "cat", "accuracy": 0.9983, "provider": "rekognition"}, ...]`).
   4. At regular intervals, insert batches of constructed `identifier`/`tags`
      pairs into the temporary table.
3. Launch a [batched update run][batched_update] which merges the existing tags
   and the new tags from the temporary table for each
   identifier[^batch_tag_example]. **Note**: the batched update DAG may need to
   be augmented in order to reference data from an existing table, similar to

>    #3415.

Reviewer 3: FWIW I think the select/update queries could be written to reference an existing table, particularly if we use `resume_update`/`query_id` carefully -- but still a good thing to note, since we could definitely add support in a less workaround way if we anticipate keeping this DAG around for future tag updates :)

  them back into the existing data.
- [**Rekognition**](#insert-new-rekognition-tags): Removing the added labels
  would likely involve another batched update which would remove any of the tags
  with the provider `rekognition` in them.

## Risks

<!-- What risks are we taking with this solution? Are there risks that once taken can’t be undone?-->

The [Clarifai filtering step](#filter-clarifai-tags) is necessarily (and mostly
irreversibly, depending on how long we keep the snapshot prior to executing that
step) removing data from the catalog database. Most of this data are tags that
are already not exposed due to the [accuracy threshold](#accuracy-selection).

Adding this new data will affect search relevancy. Discussion around that risk
can be found
[in the project proposal](20240320-project_proposal_rekognition_data.md#success).

## Prior art

<!-- Include links to documents and resources that you used when coming up with your solution. Credit people who have contributed to the solution that you wish to acknowledge. -->

Previous examples for tag manipulation using the batched update DAG are shared
throughout[^batch_tag_example].

## Analysis explanation

> I downloaded the first 100MB of the file using the following command:

Reviewer 3: This is very cool, thanks for including the script.

# 2024-05-30 Implementation Plan: Augment the catalog database with suitable Rekognition tags

**Author**: @AetherUnbound

<!-- See the implementation plan guide for more information: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/tree/19791f51c063d0979112f4b9f4eeace04c8cf5ff/docs/projects#implementation-plans-status-in-rfc -->
<!-- This template is exhaustive and may include sections which aren't relevant to your project. Feel free to remove any sections which would not be useful to have. -->

## Reviewers

<!-- Choose two people at your discretion who make sense to review this based on their existing expertise. Check in to make sure folks aren't currently reviewing more than one other proposal or RFC. -->

> - [ ] @sarayourfriend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [x] @sarayourfriend
```

- Sexual orientation
- Nationality
- Race
- Marital status

There are other categories which might be useful for search relevancy and are
less likely to be applied in an insensitive manner. These labels **should not**
be excluded, unless they are otherwise gendered (e.g. "stewardess", "actress",
etc.). Some examples include:

- Occupation
- Health and disability status
- Political affiliation or preference

> - Religious affiliation or preference

Reviewer 3: In [this comment thread](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/pull/4417#discussion_r1623673094) there was discussion about filtering all demographic information related to human subjects, which would include most of these I think. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I thought the comment thread landed on filtering only genered terms from those, but keeping others? Maybe we don't need to have such a strict policy here and should overall suggest considering these when reviewing the list of tags? This feels like a _very_ abstract way of talking about an actually concrete set of tags. There aren't even tags related to health or disability status in Rekognition, as far as I saw, for example. Could we go case-by-case during the review of the tags, trusting that we all agree on the principle of what we're getting at here (excluding tags that presuppose something about the subject that cannot be reliably derived from an aesthetic judgement)?

Author: Yea I added a provision specifically talking about the gendered aspect of some of the demographic pieces in this list, but I do think having these would be useful if they're provided. We'll certainly get a better sense of what might be better to _add_ to the list of things we're filtering once we actually go through the various provider lists, as Sara mentions.

Reviewer 3: I don't see where we landed on that -- Sara and I both singled out the religious affiliation in particular as being problematic for that reason (presuppoing something that can't be determined just from looks), and Zack's and my last comments are both in support of filtering all demographic information. I agree that these are super abstract categories and that it should be considered case-by-case in the review of the tags, but won't the reviewers be using this IP to make their judgments? Explicitly singling these categories out as okay/not worth filtering in the IP _does_ feel like a strict policy as opposed to leaving it to case-by-case review, and if I was reviewing the list of tags I would assume this meant we've agreed to definitely include religious affiliations, for instance 🤷‍♀️ 

If it's just the case that Rekognition doesn't have any tags related to these categories anyway, so it's not a problem _this time_, I would still want our documentation to accurately reflect the sorts of tags we want to filter when we eventually encounter them.

This still wasn't a blocker for me, particularly because it's easy to change down the road, but this response is more confusing to me. I'm not sure I would know which tags to filter if I were reviewing the list.

Author: Thanks for bringing this back up Staci, and I'm sorry that I missed this! I'll come back with an update to the IP to clarify this, specifically around having it be more case-by-case but suggesting to avoid all demographics entirely.
